#Lovefield Design Document
## Transaction Management

Transaction is an atomic unit of execution that guarantees all queries inside
this transaction to be all committed or all failed. Function-wise, transactions
are either read-only or read-write; Syntax-wise, transactions can be implicit or
explicit. The differences will be discussed below.

### Implicit v.s. Explicit Transactions

Explicit transacitons are created by `createTransaction()`. For example:

```js
var tx = db.createTransaction(lf.TransactionType.READ_ONLY);
```

The explicit transaction also has an `exec()` method that will run all its
queries in one physical transaction: which means all data will be flushed out
to IndexedDB only once if there are write operations. For read-only operations,
it implies that all rows must be read from the same snapshot. Lovefield Cache
will guarantee the correctness, however, it determines what to load and when to
load data from IndexedDB itself.

Implicit transactions are created when `exec()` of a query builder is called.
For example:

```js
db.select().from(job).exec();  // Implicit read-only transaction.
db.insert().into(job).values(rows).exec();  // Implicit read-write transaction.
```

Implicit transactions can have performance consequences. Lovefield does not
identify those deficiencies. It is the user's responsibility to group their
writes as much as possible.


### Read-Only v.s. Read-Write
Read-Only transactions imply that all the queries inside them will only read
from database snapshots. Contrarily, the read-write transactions imply some of
their queries may change database contents. The major effect of specifying
transaction type is the scheduling of transactions.


### Runner
The core logic of runner is to schedule and run transactions in correct order.
Each transaction has a calculated scope. Unlike IndexedDB, Lovefield calculates
transaction scope for the users instead of letting user specify what scope
to use. Lovefield allows multiple concurrent reader for a given table,
until a writer asks to lock the table. All transactions are executed by Runner.
Based on scopes, runner will arrange the execution order of transactions, and
attempt to concurrently execute as many transactions as it can.

The transactions are wrapped in `Task` objects. Besides scope operations, Task
objects are also used to implement observing SELECT queries. When a SELECT
query is been observed, the tasks will check if that query needs to be re-run
provided that the query's scope has changes, or the query had been bound to
different set of parameters.


### Journal
The atomicity of a transaction is guaranteed by `Journal`, which serves as
an in-memory snapshot of transaction execution states. When a transaction is
executed, the physical plans of queries inside it will be executed one-by-one.
For physical plans that needs to change database contents, these changes are
staged inside Journal. When all the plans are executed, a diff between
post-transaction and pre-transaction states will be generated, and flush into
persistent store. Since IndexedDB provides atomic writing, this writing will be
guarateed to be all-success or all-fail, and hence the transaction is committed
or rolled back.
